               LATERAL BUCKLING ANALYSIS OF SUBSEA RIGID PIPELINE.

Tools used:
 -  Abaqus FEA
 -  Python
 -  xlsxwriter

Description:
Subsea pipeline are subjected to high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) which causes expansion of the pipeline.. But due to seabed restraint, significant level of compressive effective axial forces are generated which can cause global buckling. The first step in lateral buckling design is to perform lateral buckling susceptibility checks. A pipeline is said to be susceptible to lateral buckling when the compressive effective axial force is greater than the critical buckling force. The formulations for the effective axial force and critical buckling force can be found in DNVGLSTF101 (Submarine pipeline system) , DNVGLSTF110 (global buckling of submarine pipelines) or by uing the SafebuckIII methodology. 

For the line(s) that are susceptible, the 2nd step is to perform FEA global analysis using a rogue buckle with an imperfection to instigate the buckling of the line. The use of FEA will enable the determination of the extent of buckling and to check if the integrity of the pipeline will be compromise.

Lateral buckling is not a failure mode on its own, but if not contained can lead to local buckling, fatigue and fracture which are failure modes.

The work here is to present the methodology for the global FEA analysis using Abaqus software. Abaqus software is very robust for solving problems that involves non-linearities. Lateral buckling is a highly non-linear process due to geometric non-linearity, soil non-linearity and material non-linearity making Abaqus a more suitable software for the analysis.

PREPROCESSING:
First, all the input parameters for the model is written in a file called INPUTDATA.inp . The INPUTDATA.inp contains the :
-  Pipe dimensions (Pipeline length, Diameter, wall thickness, pipe submerged weight), 
-  Environmental data ( Water depth, seawater temperature, hydrostatic pressure external)
-  Material data (yield strength, Young's modulus, poisson ratio,pipe density,Coefficient of thermal expansion), 
-  Plasticty data (Yield stresses versus plastic strains)
-  Operating data (Design and operating  Pressure, temperature)
-  Soil data ( Pressure-overclosures, axial and lateral friction factors)
-  Residual lay tension
-  FLET structure resistance
-  Imperfection (displacement of 1m in lateral direction).
-  Mesh size (a mesh size of 0.6m was used around the buckle region to accurately capture the behaviour at the    buckle region).

Thereafter, an input file is built which calls the INPUTDATA using Abaqus keyword   *INCLUDE .
A pipeline of length 5000m was modelled  with material API5LX65 grade with a thick pipe beam section. The PIPE31H beam element was used for the pipeline . PIPE31H element is a  2 node hybrid pipe element with each node having 6 degrees of freedom ( 3 translational and 3 rotational). The non-linear material model includes both the elastic and plastic isotropic hardening data.

The seabed was modelled with analytical rigid surface which is computationally efficient , using anisotropic decoupled friction values. thereby benefiting from a two-surface seabed capable of decoupling contact frictions at orthogonal directions .The contact between the pipeline and the seabed was generated by creating a surface interaction between the pair including the pressure-overclosure surface behaviour.

The boundary conditions includes constarining all the seabed motions to a rigid body reference point, constraining the rotations of the pipeline, and fixing all 6dofs at the left end, and right end of pipeline is free.

The following steps were considered :
STEP1: External Pressure ,emptyweight, RLT
STEP2: Introduce buckle
STEP3: Release buckle
STEP4: Remove Residual Lay Tension and apply friction for empty case
STEP5: Flooded condition
STEP6: Hydrotest condition
STEP7: Dewater
STEP8: Apply Operating condition.

Relevant results are requested to be written to the Abaqus output database (.odb).
The analysis is runned and successfully completed.

POSTPROCESSING:
A python script was written that search the directory where the odb is, open the odb and extract the relevant results. Relevant result include:

1. Maximum Lateral displacement (U3)
2. Maximum Lateral section moment (SM2)
3. Effective Axial Force (ESF1)
4. Strain (EE11 + PE).

The above results are important inputs for determining the integrity of the pipeline for instance local buckling checks(LCC & DCC).









